[Music]
okay fourteen mental traps that
insensibly control our lives
[Music]
you know it's easy to fall victim to
different clichés and stereotypes
pounding into our head by society our
minds constantly play games with us
setting traps and imaginary obstacles so
let's count it down number 14 in a truly
fair society the same standards would
apply to everyone yet we still hold
different standards for different people
we often excuse some people's behavior
but not others by arguing that they have
certain life troubles and issues but
when we justify our own poor choices we
blame circumstances that don't depend on
us such mistakes caused us to think that
we all lead the same life and that's why
it's easy to judge the people around us
but that's not true at all
if you're tired of the unfairness of
double standards don't be the one who
puts them out there starting with
yourself is always the best option
number 13 arguing just for the sake of
winning scientists Hugo Mercier and
Dan's Ferber proposed a theory that
people have learned how to argue just
for the opportunity to influence each
other in this fine it's a beautiful
thing when people are passionate enough
to stand up for what they believe in and
try to convince others of the same but a
lot of people refuse to just drop it
even when they've run out of arguments
to support themselves in ancient times
losing a debate was a risk to your life
and it seems like even today we're still
stuck in this mentality
we'll just keep bickering until the cows
come home there's nothing wrong with a
respectable exchange of ideas that's
what makes a truly great debate but we
should also know when to just agree to
disagree and not get so caught up in the
winning number 12 comparing apples to
oranges
we often compare things that are totally
incomparable which causes us to make
incorrect decisions and conclusions at
the end for example there's a belief out
there that the bigger a dog is the more
aggressive or dangerous it must be but
step back and look at that with some
reasonable thinking a dog size doesn't
affect its character or behavior and
most importantly we always compare
ourselves to others and we usually don't
come out on top
remember everything and everyone is
beautiful in its own way don't try to
copy someones uniqueness let your own
personality shine number eleven trusting
only your people since ancient times we
wittingly or unwittingly divide people
into groups us versus them and we trust
the people in our group more family
friends colleagues and loved ones and
anybody outside this inner circle is
looked at with doubt caution and
suspicion this phenomenon is known as
in-group favoritism and what's tricky
about it is that people overestimate
their group's values skills and
abilities and they underestimate those
they don't know well at all it doesn't
mean you should just naively trust any
random stranger that comes your way just
be a little more open to new people
opinions and ideas it can sometimes help
you out a lot number 10 over
generalization if something unpleasant
has ever happened to you in the past it
seems to leave a bad taste in your mouth
forever for example if a cashier once
ripped you off you'll most likely
subconsciously think that every other
cashier will try to do the same again
totally understood it's how we learn
from our mistakes and gain life
experience but over generalizing every
single situation in person just based on
one bad experience is a mental trap that
will get you nowhere in life situations
and people are different so don't look
at everything with so much suspicion and
destroy
if it's not absolutely necessary this
mental roadblock will only stop you from
trying new things and gaining even more
life experience
number nine blindly jumping on the
bandwagon human beings are social
creatures by nature and just like other
animals that live in groups we interact
and depend on each other that's why
people are inclined to do or believe
something if they know that the majority
does or believes this - and that's great
that's how we've come to establish
certain rules and acceptable conduct in
society but this kind of mob mentality
is exactly why you should take
statistical data with a grain of salt
when it comes to developing your own
opinion and making your own decisions
you should avoid just blindly following
the herd number eight we remember only
our best traits and actions aha
for better or worse people are people
and we're all a bit egotistic we like to
acknowledge only our best features heck
we sometimes have a tendency to
exaggerate our accomplishments without
even realizing it Nobel Prize winner
Daniel Kahneman hit the nail on the head
when he said it's surprising how rarely
people change their opinions and when
they do many people correct their
previous mindset trying to persuade
themselves that they've always thought
that way
how many politicians flip-flop on their
policy and completely deny ever having
been against what they now support it's
good to criticize yourself it allows you
to grow and be a better person number 7
our brain thinks or someone else in the
future
different studies show that when we
start imagining ourselves in the future
it activates the parts of our brain that
work when we think about different
people in other words if we're asked to
think about our future selves we imagine
a stranger who has almost nothing in
common with our present self and of
course this stranger is better in every
way possible but we forget one important
thing becoming this perfect stranger
doesn't happen overnight it takes a lot
of work so if you catch yourself
imagining how amazing you'll be in the
future try to figure out how your future
self is different from your current
personality and skills and start working
on those specifics by the way if you're
into psychology check out our other
video right here it'll give you a list
of useful tips that'll definitely change
your life for the better number six the
peltzman effect the gist of this
phenomenon is that an abundance of
different protective devices and safety
equipment lead a person to think they're
invincible so the risk of an accident
increases for example if we take away a
motorcyclist helmet or protective pads
they won't ride as recklessly as they
feel comfortable doing when they're
fully equipped and that's both good and
bad for obvious reasons the lesson here
is not to go overboard even if it seems
like nothing can touch you your safety
is always a priority number five
positive expectations
now this doesn't mean you should be a
grumpy pessimist all day every day
having positive expectations is a trap
common among addicted gamblers they're
sure that after a series of losses their
good luck will appear and the next game
will definitely bring a jackpot but next
thing they know they're selling all
their possessions just to finance their
addiction the same goes for
misconceptions about lucky streaks
unfortunately the odds are simply
unpredictable you can lose over and over
again or win spectacularly on your first
try and this isn't just about gambling
play the hand you're dealt in life and
if you want something good to happen
work toward it number four catchy
jingles and rhymes this is something
that companies used to fool you when
people hear catchy jingles or see
rhyming slogans they subconsciously
treat them as more trustworthy these
phrases stick with us because they're
easy to remember so when we go shopping
which items do we grab the ones that
give us an earworm of course and a lot
of people don't even bother checking
ratings or reviews to see if it's a good
quality product or not yeah why do that
if it's got such a great commercial it's
a really effective advertising trick so
take note number three there's always
more bad news look at the front page of
any newspaper or just turn on the news
how many of the stories are bad or
tragic it's no secret people are
pessimists at heart but scientists
propose another theory they say that we
subconsciously treat bad news as more
important when something good happens it
gives us less food for thought yet bad
news leaves a lot of room for
contemplation we also trust bad news
more how many times have you said yes
sounds too good to be true well there
you go
that's a mental trap
number two the IKEA effect this
phenomenon basically states that we
often appreciate an items value more if
it's connected to us our relatives or
our friends in some way for example
seemingly ordinary gloves knitted by
your dear little granny bring a smile to
your face but you wouldn't even notice a
similar pair at the store simple gifts
are way more important to us because
they're from people we love and care
about this mind track is kind of sweet
don't give this one up and number one
the superiority over others trap during
one experiment a group of drivers were
asked to compare their driving skills to
others and almost all of the
participants considered their skills
above average this means that in most
cases people have a high opinion of
their own skills they overestimate their
abilities which is why they can treat
themselves objectively and this mind
game can play serious tricks on us
making us commit to things we won't be
able to do or finish know your limits
and recognize your weaknesses so you
won't regret your decisions later don't
get in over your head
do you recognize when your mind is
tricking you how do you cope with this
tell us in the comment section below
don't forget to give us a like and share
this video with all your friends so
they'll know about these traps too click
the subscribe button and join us on the
bright side
you